NativeAOT diagnostic documentation (#36626)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/deploying/native-aot/diagnostics.md

---

> title: AOT Diagnostics

Reviewer: Should this be in the `deploying/native-aot` folder or in the `diagnostics` folder? If it's here then it should at least be linked from somewhere in the diagnostics folder.

Author: I added a link from the diagnostic overview section

> title: AOT Diagnostics

Reviewer 2: I think the below should be updated to link here:
https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/0c0cc1ce86cf21b4a8468bc578038bf6747baf9d/docs/core/deploying/native-aot/index.md?plain=1#L167-L169

description: Learn about diagnostics in NativeAOT applications
author: lakshanf
ms.author: lakshanf
ms.date: 08/07/2023
---
# Diagnostics in NativeAOT applications

> The long term goal for NativeAOT application diagnostics is to provide the rich diagnostic experience that developers expect out of a .NET application. .NET diagnostic experience was built over multiple releases and getting customer feedback on diagnostic was a critical part of that journey. NativeAOT wants to follow a similar path where the right diagnostic experience is built from prioritized customer feedback in multiple releases.

Reviewer 3: Existing does use "native AOT" (ie lower case "native" and a space between native and AOT) when referring to NAOT.

> The long term goal for NativeAOT application diagnostics is to provide the rich diagnostic experience that developers expect out of a .NET application. .NET diagnostic experience was built over multiple releases and getting customer feedback on diagnostic was a critical part of that journey. NativeAOT wants to follow a similar path where the right diagnostic experience is built from prioritized customer feedback in multiple releases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The long-term goal for native AOT application diagnostics is to provide the rich diagnostic experience that developers expect out of a .NET application. The .NET diagnostic experience was built over multiple releases, and a critical part of that journey was customer feedback. Native AOT diagnostics will follow a similar path where the right diagnostic experience is built from prioritized customer feedback in multiple releases.
```

> NativeAOT applications have the following characteristics that are important to keep in mind in diagnostic scenarios:

Reviewer 2: Maybe make this its own section and each bullet below a subsection? There's enough text in those that I think they would be more readable as subsections with headings instead of bullets.

> - Trimming as a first-class feature in NativeAOT application. Unused code in a NativeAOT application is stripped out of the final binary. Any unbounded reflection used by the application including its dependent libraries will be trimmed. NativeAOT compiler will generate warnings in such cases, and it is critical that these warnings are fixed. For example, suppressing any such warnings without careful analysis can lead to hard to debug production failures.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Trimming as a first-class feature in NativeAOT application. Unused code in a NativeAOT application is stripped out of the final binary. Any unbounded reflection used by the application, including its dependent libraries, is trimmed. The NativeAOT compiler will generate warnings in such cases, and it's critical that these warnings are fixed. For example, if you suppress any warnings without careful analysis, it can lead to hard to debug production failures.
```

> - Symbol file issues: In NativeAOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (debugging, PerfView callstacks, etc) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine (or even work great) even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled (i.e., symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, diagnostic tools can still show function names, accurate callstacks, etc even without access to the PDBs generated at application compile time).

Reviewer 2: We try to avoid `i.e.` and `etc` in docs:
https://learn.microsoft.com/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/i/ie
https://learn.microsoft.com/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/e/etc

> - Symbol file issues: In NativeAOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (debugging, PerfView callstacks, etc) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine (or even work great) even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled (i.e., symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, diagnostic tools can still show function names, accurate callstacks, etc even without access to the PDBs generated at application compile time).

Reviewer 2: Probably worth linking to the 'Native debug information' section in the overview.

> - NativeAOT application is neither a typical managed application (for example, no JIT) nor a typical native application (for example, has full GC support). The intent is to meet the reasonable diagnostics expectation of a product that is coming out of the .NET family and also the experience should feel familiar to someone who does production diagnostics on a C++ application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Native AOT apps aren't typical managed applications (for example, no JIT). They also aren't typical native applications (for example, they have full GC support). The intent is to meet the reasonable diagnostics expectation of a product in the .NET family, but the experience should also feel familiar to those using production diagnostics on C++ apps.
```

## Current NativeAOT diagnostic support

> Not all diagnostic features in NativeAOT are currently at parity with .NET. The following table summarizes NativeAOT diagnostic feature parity with .NET:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following table summarizes NativeAOT diagnostic feature parity with .NET:
```

> Not all diagnostic features in NativeAOT are currently at parity with .NET. 

This makes it sound like NativeAOT and .NET are two different things that is not the case. NativeAOT is part of .NET.

> | Feature | Fully Supported | Partially Supported | Not Supported |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Feature | Fully supported | Partially supported | Not supported |
```

> | Feature | Fully Supported | Partially Supported | Not Supported |

Author: Changed the wording on the .NET 8 tab.

| - | - | - | - |

> | Build (Inner dev loop) diagnostics | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |

Reviewer 4: We aren't supposed to use HTML where it can be avoided.

Author: I copied this from https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/native-aot since that seems to capture the message well. It will be great if we could use the same here.

Reviewer 4: I'm not even sure why the HTML is needed.  But can we just link to the section it's coming from instead of trying to reproduce it? It makes it easier to maintain that way.

| Observability | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| Profiling | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| Production debugging | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| Heap analysis | | | <span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |

> ### Build time diagnostics

Reviewer 2: Can we define what this is? When I read build-time diagnostics, I think things like build/analyzer warnings. From the text, it seems like build-time diagnostics here means using tools on the app that is not using native AOT.

Author: I changed the wording to match what @jkotas suggested above.

> Build time (inner-dev-loop experience) diagnostic experience for a NativeAOT application will match exactly the .NET application experience since the application in build-time will run on .NET. Given the challenges in acquiring diagnostics in production environment and the current gap in diagnostic tools in NativeAOT, spending time in build time diagnostic in NativeAOT will be the best solution to build a performant and reliable NativeAOT application.

Reviewer 3: > diagnostic experience for a NativeAOT application will match exactly the .NET application

dtto - this makes is sound like that NativeAOT applications are not .NET applications.

> Build time (inner-dev-loop experience) diagnostic experience for a NativeAOT application will match exactly the .NET application experience since the application in build-time will run on .NET. Given the challenges in acquiring diagnostics in production environment and the current gap in diagnostic tools in NativeAOT, spending time in build time diagnostic in NativeAOT will be the best solution to build a performant and reliable NativeAOT application.

Reviewer 3: > spending time in build time diagnostic in NativeAOT will be the best solution to build a performant and reliable NativeAOT application.

Spending time in build time diagnostics won't help you find the main performance problems.

Should we rather say that we recommend developing, debugging and testing the applications as usual and publish the working app with native AOT as one of the last steps?

Author: Native AOT `EventPipe` does not yet support collecting call stacks and using diagnostic tools like dotnet-tools for [CPU usage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/profiling/cpu-usage) in published applications will not be possible. Although CPU profiling tools like `PerfvView `, `Perf `, and VS 'Performance Profiler' would still work in production environments as mentioned below. 

Tools like VS 'Performance Profiler' in debug mode might give a familiar experience to .NET developers and was considering if it's worth highlighting that.

> ### Observability support

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer the headings for different categories of support to exactly match the wording in the table

> NativeAOT runtime supports [EventPipe](../../diagnostics/eventpipe.md) which will allow NativeAOT applications to easily trace their applications. EventPipe support will also allow most .NET diagnostic tools like [dotnet-trace](../../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md), [dotnet-counter](../../diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md), and [dotnet-monitor](../../diagnostics/dotnet-monitor.md) to work seamlessly with NativeAOT applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The native AOT runtime supports [EventPipe](../../diagnostics/eventpipe.md), which allows native AOT apps to easily trace their applications. EventPipe support also allows most .NET diagnostic tools, like [dotnet-trace](../../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md), [dotnet-counter](../../diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md), and [dotnet-monitor](../../diagnostics/dotnet-monitor.md), to work seamlessly with native AOT applications.
```

NativeAOT also provides partial support for [OpenTelemetry](../../diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md) and some [well-known event providers](../../diagnostics/well-known-event-providers.md). Not all [runtime events](../../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) are supported in NativeAOT.

> ### CPU Profiling support

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### CPU profiling support
```

> NativeAOT also provides partial support for [OpenTelemetry](../../diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md) and some [well-known event providers](../../diagnostics/well-known-event-providers.md). Not all [runtime events](../../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) are supported in NativeAOT.

Reviewer 3: Can we be a bit more specific about what is and is not supported with OpenTelemetry to set expectations?

Reviewer 5: The three Pillars of Observability, including logging, tracing and metrics will be AOT-compatible.

> ### Profiling support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CPU Profiling support
```

> "Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler" provider is not currently supported in NativeAOT. Platform specific tools like [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview), and [Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) can be used to collect CPU samples of a NativeAOT application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The "Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler" provider is not currently supported in native AOT. However, platform-specific tools like [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) and [Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) can be used to collect CPU samples.
```

> ### Production debugging

Reviewer 2: This seems more about debugging in general?

Author: Added the part about observability as @jkotas suggested. Debugging experience is drastically difference in build and production phases for native AOT and wanted to differentiate in the doc.

> A NativeAOT application in production environment is a native application with full GC support and can be debugged by native platform debuggers  (e.g. WinDbg or Visual Studio on Windows, and gdb or lldb on Unix-like systems). It is critical that the corresponding symbol file for the application is available to do production debugging.

Reviewer 3: Using debuggers in productions is extremely rare. The typical production debugging is done using logs and traces.

> The NativeAOT compiler generates information about line numbers, types, locals and parameters. The native debugger will allow inspecting stack trace and variables, stepping into/over source lines, or setting line breakpoints. Additional feature support like debugging around Exceptions, fixing some name mangling, step into virtual calls, hot reload, stepping into runtime library code, property and expression evaluation are planned in future releases.

Reviewer 3: > hot reload

I do think we are going to ever do hot reload for apps published with AOT. Also, hot reload is not really a production debugging scenario.

> Collecting a [dump](../../diagnostics/dumps.md) file for a NativeAOT application would involve some manual steps in .NET8 release.

Reviewer 2: Are there going to be more details about the manual steps here?

Author: This is still being worked on. Filed https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/issues/4150 to track this.

Reviewer 3: Link to that issue from here? Saying "involve some manual steps" without giving a clue what these steps should be is not very useful as a documentation.

### Heap analysis support

> Heap analysis tool, [dotnet-gcdump](../../diagnostics/dotnet-gcdump.md), is not currently supported in NativeAOT.

Reviewer: dotnet-gcdump is not the only heap analysis we have, we also have perfview and VS with heap analysis features. It would be good to say if there's any way to do heap analysis

---
title: AOT diagnostics
description: Learn about diagnostics in native AOT applications
author: lakshanf
ms.author: lakshanf
ms.date: 08/07/2023
---
# Diagnostics in native AOT applications

The long-term goal for native AOT application diagnostics is to provide the rich diagnostic experience that developers expect out of a .NET application. The .NET diagnostic experience was built over multiple releases, and a critical part of that journey was customer feedback. Native AOT diagnostics will follow a similar path where the right diagnostic experience is built from prioritized customer feedback in multiple releases.

## Native AOT application features

Native AOT applications have the following characteristics that are important to keep in mind in diagnostic scenarios.

### Trimming as a first-class feature

> Unused code in a native AOT application is stripped out of the final binary. Any unbounded reflection used by the application, including its dependent libraries, is trimmed. The native AOT compiler will generate warnings in such cases, and it's critical that these warnings are fixed. For example, if you suppress any warnings without careful analysis, it can lead to hard to debug production failures.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unused code in a native AOT application is stripped out of the final binary. Any unbounded reflection used by the application, including its dependent libraries, is trimmed. The native AOT compiler will generate warnings in such cases, and it's critical that these warnings are fixed. For example, if you suppress any warnings without careful analysis, it can lead to hard-to-debug production failures.
```

### Importance of the symbol file

> In native AOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (such as debugging, [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) callstacks) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine (or even work great) even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled (that is, symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, diagnostic tools can still show function names and accurate callstacks even without access to the PDBs generated at application compile time)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In native AOT, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics (such as debugging [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) callstacks) don't work at all unless the diagnostic tool has access to the monolithic PDB that was generated when the application was compiled. In .NET, symbol-file-dependent diagnostics generally work just fine, or even great, even if the diagnostic tool has no access to any PDBs that were generated when the application was compiled. That is, symbols for the .NET runtime and the .NET libraries can be pulled from symbol servers, and diagnostic tools can still show function names and accurate call stacks even without access to the compile-time PDBs.
```

### Application type

> Native AOT apps aren't typical managed applications (for example, no JIT). They also aren't typical native applications (for example, they have full GC support). The intent is to meet the reasonable diagnostics expectation of a product in the .NET family, but the experience should also feel familiar to those using production diagnostics on C++ apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Native AOT apps aren't typical managed applications (for example, no JIT). They also aren't typical native applications (for example, they have full GC support). The intent for diagnostics is to meet a reasonable expectation of a product in the .NET family, but the experience should also feel familiar to those using production diagnostics on C++ apps.
```

## .NET 8 native AOT diagnostic support

The following table summarizes diagnostic features supported for native AOT deployments:

| Feature | Fully supported | Partially supported | Not supported |
| - | - | - | - |
| Build (Inner dev loop) diagnostics | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| Observability | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| CPU Profiling | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| Production debugging | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| Heap analysis | | | <span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |

> ### Build (Inner dev loop) diagnostics

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Build (inner dev loop) diagnostics
```

Publishing your app as native AOT produces an app that has been ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled to native code. As mentioned above, this means that not all diagnostic tools will work seamlessly with published native AOT applications in .NET 8. However, all .NET diagnostic tools are available for developers during the application building stage. We recommend developing, debugging, and testing the applications as usual and publish the working app with native AOT as one of the last steps.

### Observability

> The native AOT runtime supports [EventPipe](../../diagnostics/eventpipe.md), which allows native AOT apps to easily trace their applications. EventPipe support also allows most .NET diagnostic tools, like [dotnet-trace](../../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md), [dotnet-counter](../../diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md), and [dotnet-monitor](../../diagnostics/dotnet-monitor.md), to work seamlessly with native AOT applications. EventPipe is an optional component in native AOT and require the `EventSourceSupport` property to be set to `true` to include EventPipe support.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The native AOT runtime supports [EventPipe](../../diagnostics/eventpipe.md), which allows native AOT apps to easily trace their applications. EventPipe support also allows most .NET diagnostic tools, like [dotnet-trace](../../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md), [dotnet-counter](../../diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md), and [dotnet-monitor](../../diagnostics/dotnet-monitor.md), to work seamlessly with native AOT applications. EventPipe is an optional component in native AOT. To include EventPipe support, set the `EventSourceSupport` MSBuild property to `true`.
```

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <EventSourceSupport>true</EventSourceSupport>
</PropertyGroup>
```

> [OpenTelemetry](../../diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md) is expected to support native AOT in the key three pillars of observability: logging, tracing, and metrics in .NET 8. Native AOT provides partial support for some [well-known event providers](../../diagnostics/well-known-event-providers.md). Not all [runtime events](../../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) are supported in native AOT.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry](../../diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md) is expected to support native AOT in the key three pillars of observability&mdash;logging, tracing, and metrics&mdash;in .NET 8. Native AOT provides partial support for some [well-known event providers](../../diagnostics/well-known-event-providers.md). Not all [runtime events](../../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) are supported in native AOT.
```

### CPU profiling

> The "Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler" provider is not currently supported in native AOT. However, platform-specific tools like [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) and [Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) can be used to collect CPU samples of a native AOT application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Platform-specific tools like [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) and [Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) can be used to collect CPU samples of a native AOT application.
```

> The "Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler" provider is not currently supported in native AOT.

It is not clear how this translates into user experience with tools. I do not think we need to mention this specific provider. (We are not listing the precise list of events and providers that work with native AOT.)

> The "Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler" provider is not currently supported in native AOT. However, platform-specific tools like [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview), and [Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) can be used to collect CPU samples of a native AOT application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The "Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler" provider is not currently supported in native AOT. However, platform-specific tools like [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) and [Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) can be used to collect CPU samples of a native AOT application.
```

### Production debugging

> Typical production debugging scenarios are done through logging and tracing, and will be [supported](#observability) in native AOT. Low-level debugging, using platform debuggers like WinDbg or Visual Studio on Windows, and gdb or lldb on Unix-like systems, can be used in native AOT. For this case, it is critical that the corresponding symbol file for the application is available to do production debugging.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Typical production debugging scenarios are done through logging and tracing and are [supported](#observability) in native AOT. Low-level debugging, using platform debuggers like WinDbg or Visual Studio on Windows, and gdb or lldb on Unix-like systems, can be used in native AOT. For this case, it's critical that the corresponding symbol file for the application is available.
```

> The native AOT compiler generates information about line numbers, types, locals, and parameters. The native debugger will allow inspecting stack trace and variables, stepping into/over source lines, or setting line breakpoints. Additional feature support like debugging around Exceptions, fixing some name mangling, step into virtual calls, stepping into runtime library code, property and expression evaluation are planned in future releases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The native AOT compiler generates information about line numbers, types, locals, and parameters. The native debugger allows inspecting stack trace and variables, stepping into or over source lines, or setting line breakpoints. Additional feature support like debugging around exceptions, fixing some name mangling, stepping into virtual calls, stepping into runtime library code, and property and expression evaluation are planned in future releases.
```

> Collecting a [dump](../../diagnostics/dumps.md) file for a native AOT application would involve some manual steps in .NET8 release.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Collecting a [dump](../../diagnostics/dumps.md) file for a native AOT application involves some manual steps in .NET 8.
```

### Heap analysis

> Managed heap analysis is not currently supported in native AOT. Heap analysis tools like, [dotnet-gcdump](../../diagnostics/dotnet-gcdump.md), [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) and Visual Studio heap analysis tools will not work in native AOT in .NET 8.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Managed heap analysis is not currently supported in native AOT. Heap analysis tools like [dotnet-gcdump](../../diagnostics/dotnet-gcdump.md), [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview), and Visual Studio heap analysis tools don't work in native AOT in .NET 8.
```
